TELCODOCS-1576: Image-based upgrade with Lifecycle Agent (#69809)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/ztp-image-based-upgrade-with-backup.adoc

During the upgrade process, the OADP Operator creates a backup of the artifacts specified in the OADP CRs, then the {lcao} upgrades the cluster.

If the upgrade fails or stops, an automatic rollback is initiated.
If you have an issue after the upgrade, you can initiate a manual rollback.
For more information about manual rollback, see "(Optional) Initiating rollback of the {sno} clusters after an image-based upgrade".

[IMPORTANT]
====
During the Developer Preview of this feature, when upgrading a cluster, any custom trusted certificates configured on the cluster will be lost. As a temporary workaround, to preserve these certificates, you must use a seed image from a seed cluster that trusts the certificates.
====

.Prerequisites

* Complete the `Prep` stage.

.Procedure

. When you are ready, move to the upgrade stage by changing the value of the `stage` field to `Upgrade` in the `ImageBasedUpgrade` CR.
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch imagebasedupgrades.lca.openshift.io example-upgrade -p='{"spec": {"stage": "Upgrade"}}' --type=merge
----

. Check the status of the `ImageBasedUpgrade` CR:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc get ibu -A -oyaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ oc get ibu -oyaml
```

----

+
.Example output
[source,yaml]
----
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-01T09:00:00Z"
    message: In progress
    observedGeneration: 2
    reason: InProgress
    status: "False"
    type: Idle
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-01T09:00:00Z"
    message: 'Prep completed: total: 121 (pulled: 1, skipped: 120, failed: 0)'
    observedGeneration: 2
    reason: Completed
    status: "True"
    type: PrepCompleted
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-01T09:00:00Z"
    message: Prep completed
    observedGeneration: 2
    reason: Completed
    status: "False"
    type: PrepInProgress
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-01T09:00:00Z"
    message: Upgrade completed
    observedGeneration: 3
    reason: Completed
    status: "True"
    type: UpgradeCompleted
----

. The OADP Operator creates a backup of the data specified in the OADP `Backup` and `Restore` CRs.

. The target cluster reboots.

. Monitor the status of the CR:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc get ibu -A -oyaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ oc get ibu -oyaml
```

----

. The cluster reboots.

. Once you are satisfied with the upgrade, commit to the changes by changing the value of the `stage` field to `Idle` in the `ImageBasedUpgrade` CR:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch imagebasedupgrades.lca.openshift.io example-upgrade -p='{"spec": {"stage": "Idle"}}' --type=merge
----

+
[IMPORTANT]
====
You cannot roll back the changes once you move to the `Idle` stage after an upgrade.
====

+
--
The {lcao} deletes all resources created during the upgrade process.
--

.Verification

. Check the status of the `ImageBasedUpgrade` CR:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc get ibu -A -oyaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ oc get ibu -oyaml
```

----

. Check the status of the `ImageBasedUpgrade` CR:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get ibu -A -oyaml
----

+
.Example output
[source,yaml]
----
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-01T09:00:00Z"
    message: In progress
    observedGeneration: 2
    reason: InProgress
    status: "False"
    type: Idle
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-01T09:00:00Z"
    message: 'Prep completed: total: 121 (pulled: 1, skipped: 120, failed: 0)'
    observedGeneration: 2
    reason: Completed
    status: "True"
    type: PrepCompleted
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-01T09:00:00Z"
    message: Prep completed
    observedGeneration: 2
    reason: Completed
    status: "False"
    type: PrepInProgress
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-01T09:00:00Z"
    message: Upgrade completed
    observedGeneration: 3
    reason: Completed
    status: "True"
    type: UpgradeCompleted
----

. The OADP Operator creates a backup of the data specified in the OADP `Backup` and `Restore` CRs.

. The target cluster reboots.

. Monitor the status of the CR:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get ibu -A -oyaml
----

. The cluster reboots.
+
--

> After the cluster reboots, the {lcao} does the following:

Reviewer 2: from the new image installed during the prep stage

Author: Isn't the image only pulled during the prep stage? My understanding was that the installation happens during the upgrade stage. I can also just say:
> After the cluster reboots from the new image, the {lcao} does the following:

// Module included in the following assemblies:
// Epic TELCOSTRAT-160 (4.15/4.16), story TELCODOCS-1576
// * scalability_and_performance/ztp-talm-updating-managed-policies.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ztp-image-based-upgrading-with-backup_{context}"]
= Upgrading the {sno} clusters with {lcao} with backup

When you have generated the seed image and have completed the `Prep` stage, you can begin upgrading the target clusters.
During the upgrade process, the OADP Operator creates a backup of the cluster, then {lcao} reimages it.

[IMPORTANT]
====
If the upgrade fails or stops, you must roll back the upgrade.
For more information, see "(Optional) Initiating rollback of the {sno} clusters after an image-based upgrade".

In case of a rollback, all the resources created by the {lcao} are automatically deleted.
====

.Prerequisites

* You have completed the `Prep` stage.
* You have installed the OADP Operator.

> * You can an Object storage with your configured credentials.

Reviewer 3: You have a S3 compatible storage solution. You have a bucket created and the proper credentials ready to use that S3 bucket.

// Install OADP and storage configgged: Is it okay to have it in the prereqs? Or is this something that the user would expect to be guided through? With the different storage solutions, we probably can't cover everything.

> 

Reviewer 3: I do not think we should cover the installation of a S3 compatible object storage. We can link to ODF documentation for instance or MinIO since it is a certified OCP operator.

.Procedure

This example demonstrates how to back up and upgrade a cluster with applications on a persistent volume.

[NOTE]
====
The target cluster does not need to be detached from the hub cluster.
====

. Create the secret with your credentials to your Object storage.
. Create the configuration for the OADP Operator to access your Object storage instance.
//TODO Check existing OADP docs for steps, link to them if applicable

> . Specify what you want to back up:

Reviewer 3: It will depend on the application/s we want to backup and restore. AFAIK the backup_acm_klusterlet.yaml is mandatory if your SNO is managed by a hub cluster cc/ @donpenney . The localvolume will depend if you want to backup & restore persistent volume, usually yes. 

Also, the user can create more than 3 backup and restore CRs. I will explain those 3 yamls as an example of a persistent application that we want to restore during the upgrade.

//TODO decide how to present this info. Might be best to create a reference section with all the example CRs.

`backup_acm_klusterlet.yaml`:: This allows you to reattach the cluster to the hub cluster once the upgrade and restore are completed.

> `backup_localvolume.yaml`:: This allows to restore the persistent volume that contains the `index.html` of your application.

Reviewer 3: `index.html` only makes sense on the example written in the e2e doc web application example. Probably the user workload will be totally different.

`backup_app.yaml`:: The information that must be backed up is different for each application. This CR specifies what needs to be backed up to recover the applications.

. Define the restore order for the OADP Operator in the `Restore` CR by using the `lca.openshift.io/apply-wave` field:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: velero.io/v1
kind: Restore
metadata:
  name: acm-klusterlet
  namespace: openshift-adp
  labels:
    velero.io/storage-location: default
  annotations:
    lca.openshift.io/apply-wave: "1"
spec:
  backupName:
    acm-klusterlet
---
apiVersion: velero.io/v1
kind: Restore
metadata:
  name: apache-app
  namespace: openshift-adp
  labels:
    velero.io/storage-location: default
  annotations:
    lca.openshift.io/apply-wave: "3"
spec:
  backupName:
    apache-app
---
apiVersion: velero.io/v1
kind: Restore
metadata:
  name: localvolume
  namespace: openshift-adp
  labels:
    velero.io/storage-location: default
  annotations:
    lca.openshift.io/apply-wave: "2"
spec:
  backupName:

>     localvolume

Reviewer 3: Again, this is specific to my app since it is using the Local Storage Operator to provide persistent storage to the simple web application.

----

> . Create a `ConfigMap` CR for the backup and restore information that the {lcao} uses during the upgrade.

Reviewer 3: I think this is important to have some context. So, this configMap basically contains CRs that are understood by OADP so it can configure the backup & restore. Since LCA is in charge of orchestrating the whole backup&restore process, it gets this info from a configmap and passes it to OADP at the right moment of the upgrade process.  That's why we need to generate a configMap from OADP CRs.

.. Create a `kustomization.yaml` that appends the information to a `ConfigMap` CR:
+
[source,yaml]
----
configMapGenerator:
- name: oadp-cm
  namespace: openshift-adp
  files:
  - backup_acm_klusterlet.yaml
  - backup_localvolume.yaml
  - backup_app.yaml
  - restore_acm_klusterlet.yaml
  - restore_localvolumes.yaml
  - restore_app.yaml
----

.. Create the `ConfigMap` CR:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ kustomize build ./ -o OadpCm.yaml
----
+
.Example output
+
[source,terminal]
----
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:

>   name: oadp-cm-7gtgdhmdc5

Reviewer 3: Note: the name of the configMap is autogenerated. I think we can set a "persistent" name instead. However, we should write down that name cause it will be referenced in the IBU oadpContent spec.

  namespace: openshift-adp
[...]
----

.. Apply the `ConfigMap` CR:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f OadpCm.yaml
----

. Append the `imageBasedUpgrade` CR with the backup and restore information:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: lca.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: ImageBasedUpgrade
metadata:
  name: upgrade
spec:
  stage: Idle #TODO might need to change or move these steps
  seedImageRef:
    version: 4.14.6
    image: <seed_container_image>
  oadpContent:
  - name: oadp-cm-7gtgdhmdc5
    namespace: openshift-adp
----

> The OADP Operator creates a backup of the data specified in the OADP `Backup` and `Restore` CRs.

Reviewer 3: Yes, but it will be created once we move to the Upgrade stage, which is the next step.

//TODO provide examples with the OADP CRs

. Move to the upgrade stage by changing the `Prep` value to `Upgrade` in the `ImageBasedUpgrade` CR.
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc patch imagebasedupgrades.lca.openshift.io upgrade -p='{"spec": {"stage": "Upgrade"}}' --type=merge

Reviewer 3: Again, this is executed in the target SNO, however it can be done using a GitOps approach.

----

. Check the status of the `imageBasedUpgrade` CR:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get imagebasedupgrades.lca.openshift.io upgrade -oyaml
----

+
.Example output
[source,yaml]
----
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-01T09:00:00Z"
    message: In progress
    observedGeneration: 2
    reason: InProgress
    status: "False"
    type: Idle
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-01T09:00:00Z"
    message: 'Prep completed: total: 121 (pulled: 1, skipped: 120, failed: 0)'
    observedGeneration: 2
    reason: Completed
    status: "True"
    type: PrepCompleted
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-01T09:00:00Z"
    message: Prep completed
    observedGeneration: 2
    reason: Completed
    status: "False"
    type: PrepInProgress
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-01T09:00:00Z"
    message: Upgrade completed
    observedGeneration: 3
    reason: Completed
    status: "True"
    type: UpgradeCompleted
----

> . The target cluster reboots.

Reviewer 3: Before rebooting, the backups are executed and stored in the S3 bucket we configured in the DataProtectionApplication. This information can be monitored from the logs of LCA, I mean, if the backup was successful or not. 

Also it can troubleshoot by checking the S3 compatible storage solution, check if the info is there or not. Or by executing in the target cluster:

~~~sh
$ oc get backups -n openshift-adp -o custom-columns=NAME:.metadata.name,Status:.status.phase,Reason:.status.failureReason
NAME             Status      Reason
acm-klusterlet   Completed   <none>
apache-app       Completed   <none>
localvolume      Completed   <none>
~~~

. Monitor the logs:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ journalctl --boot | grep -v 'get resource list for' | grep installation-configuration ; \

> journalctl -f | grep -v 'get resource list for' | grep installation-configuration

Reviewer 3: I would not include this, or at least for troubleshooting. If you want to monitor the logs you have two options:

* The option shown above, get the status of the IBU CR
* Check the logs of the LCA which writes the different tasks at a high level. Notice that the node will automatically reboot at some point and boot from the new stateroot.

----

> . After the cluster reboots, the {lcao} reimages the target cluster, and then applies the cluster and application configurations.

Reviewer 3: As commented previously, LCA:

* Boots from the new stateroot created in the previous Stage (IIRC)
* Reconfigures the cluster (there are two systemd services in charge of doing so - see troubleshoot). The cryptographic regeneration is done here.
* Once the cluster is up and running, the restore of the backup process is executed. It can be monitor checking LCA logs 

~~~sh
2024-01-18T08:37:07.972490509Z 2024-01-18T08:37:07Z	INFO	controllers.ImageBasedUpgrade.BackupRestore	Restores status	{"missing backups": [], "pending restores": [], "progressing restores": [], "succeeded restores": ["apache-app"], "failed restores": []}
2024-01-18T08:37:07.972501895Z 2024-01-18T08:37:07Z	INFO	controllers.ImageBasedUpgrade.UpgradHandler	All restores succeeded
~~~ 
 
and `oc get restore -A` from the target cluster

~~~sh
$ oc get restores -n openshift-adp -o custom-columns=NAME:.metadata.name,Status:.status.phase,Reason:.status.failureReason

NAME             Status      Reason
acm-klusterlet   Completed   <none>
apache-app       Completed   <none>
localvolume      Completed   <none>
~~~

Cryptographic keys are regenerated through the recert tool.

> .Verification

Reviewer 3: I think `oc get mcp` it is interesting because some times shows Ready in clusterversion but progressing in mcp.

Check that the restores were executed successfully either checking the app or checking the restore CRs

Check the status of the IBU CR

Check the logs of LCA

Reviewer 2: The operators job is to check status, the admin should be monitoring the CR status

// Module included in the following assemblies:
// Epic TELCOSTRAT-160 (4.15/4.16), story TELCODOCS-1576
// * scalability_and_performance/ztp-talm-updating-managed-policies.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ztp-image-based-upgrading-with-backup_{context}"]
= Upgrading the {sno} clusters with {lcao}

> With the generated seed image and after completing the `Prep` stage, you can start upgrading your cluster.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When you have generated the seed image and have completed the `Prep` stage, you can begin upgrading the managed cluster.
```

During the upgrade process, the OADP Operator creates a backup of the cluster, then {lcao} starts reimaging the target cluster.

[IMPORTANT]
====
If the upgrade fails or stops, you must initiate a rollback. For more information, see next section.
In this case, all the resources created by the {lcao} are automatically deleted.
====

.Prerequisites

// Anything different from the prep stage?

.Procedure

. Move to the upgrade stage by changing the `Prep` value to `Upgrade` in the `ImageBasedUpgrade` CR.
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: lca.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: ImageBasedUpgrade
metadata:
  name: example-upgrade
spec:
  stage: Upgrade
  seedImageRef:
    version: 4.14.0

>     image: quay.io/<seed_image_repository>

Reviewer 4: We're pointing to a container image here, and it doesn't necessairly have to be on quay.io

```suggestion
    image: <seed_container_image>
```
